at 701 gilchrist street just gilchrist in college
station talking to bud denton now we're going to
stop and see you hope it's working it is the first
month of the year january the 20th 1999
bud would you tell us for anybody who might listen
or read to this later give a brief biographical
summary of yourself before you came here as an
employee. Because we'll do your student days on
another occasion. All right. Well, let's see. My
first experience was as a graduate student. Well,
but back up. Born where? Oh, I'm sorry. I thought
you said we'd do that later. Oh, I was born in
Lexington, Kentucky. in 1922. My father was a coal
mine lawyer at Stearns, Kentucky, Stearns Coal
and Lumber Company until 1927. And he was
appointed as special assistant to the Attorney
General of the United States in Washington, DC.
And we moved there. My mother died when I was 10. And
we, my sister and I moved to Cleveland, Tennessee
to with my mother's parents and I was raised and
went to school there until I completed high school
and then I came to Texas and enrolled at A&M. And
what year was that? 41. September 41. And then
you're here for how long before you go? Well we were
on a three semester deal so I completed two full
years and went on into service and of course deal
then was if you left school, you were immediately
recalled or called. We were all, I was one of the
first in enlisted reserve in September of 42. And
it was about a month before I was called active too.
And I spent 38 months in the armed forces. Where?
Camp Walters, Texas. Camp Blanding, Florida. in
the wonderful peninsula of Italy for 13 months
combat, yeah. And then you came back civilian life
here? Spring of 46. Now I was married, I should have
pointed that out, in 1943. So I was married when I
went overseas and then when we came back to school
we were married couple. And you lived at Dr.
McNew's Garage Park. It was nice. And then, all
right, you graduate when? Well, I finished in 47
summer, and I was offered a graduate scholarship,
they called it then. It was $100 a month, taught 12
hours of physical ed. Les Palmer taught 12 hours.
Another guy taught 12 hours for $70, so for $270.
They got 36 hours of teaching, which I enjoyed. The
experience was invaluable. And then they
recommended me...
I had a summer job in the Veterans Testing Service.
We were located first in the old George McCullough
Confectionary Building, then they moved us to
Bazell. And we tested veterans and non-students,
I just stayed with it. Alright, you tested them for
what? Well, just occupational orientation, job
opportunities. Veterans had to be tested.
Alright, this was testing as they were beginning
their studies? Or if they wanted to change majors
to college students. So this was to help them
select a major and a professional? Right. And then
we did a lot of work with skilled and semi-skilled.
So can you give any examples of where the tests
obviously succeeded or didn't succeed? Well, I
can from high school, but it's difficult. Well,
college, yeah. Jack Raines and some of those
students that we had at the adjunct later. That's
Jack Raines, the Houston lawyer politician.
Entrepreneur. Entrepreneur. Stadium builder.
But anyway, that was the main jest. And then we had
absorption of the Veterans Testing Service, and
it was started, I guess, in 49 or 50, the basic
division, which was a general studies college,
which put us so far ahead. Of course, Austin has a
better background on that than I. I was integrated
into it. But describe that basic studies. Well,
all entering freshmen who came to A&M in those days
were assigned and tested. We gave a battery of
about seven tests, placement tests we called, and
talked with the students on the level of English,
the level of math. and staying out of chemistry,
you know, that sort of thing. We offered courses
in, now we call it personal development, that's
study habits. And that meant that all those
students were, study habits, personal
development, or basic psychology, which they
still have at A&M, and the occupation study. And
then we had a real high-powered one called Basic
106, which was an orientation to major fields of
study. And we had visiting teachers from biology,
chemistry, and so forth. Describe some of the
variety of the talents, or lack thereof, that you
all encountered. Well, of course, the admission
requirements at A&M, then, we all always, I think
there are were more difficult then than they may be
now. But the test cutting scores were not in the
vote. The A.C.E. and S.A.T. later were tests that
were just given and we used those in terms of
placement with English achievement and science
and math achievement and interest tests. There
must have been some of the students who came from
small high schools that were very different from
those in the big. Yeah, a lot of schools in those
days offered alternate. For instance, you took
plane geometry this year, algebra two the
following year, and if you were out of sequence.
And, of course, A&M had this deal of two algebras,
one plane geometry. And I know when working with
athletes later on, athletes later on, We had a lot
of battles with the registrar back then. Even the
math people said, well, what do you need plain
geometry for?
And what were the most popular majors then? Well,
it was general curriculum, really. A lot of kids
could play two full years and not lose credit,
unless it was something like architecture. But I
did it with athletes later. In helping them select
their courses, he could have a biology course. And
Cliff Ranstall would let them take engineering
graphics, for instance, or that ME 101, you
remember, that was just kind of a slide rule
course, and see how they fell with it. Of course, we
had superb teachers, Medlin and Dobson and all
those folks over in biology. Math was still a...
Let's digress on that. Okay. Describe some of the
great teachers that you remember. Well, I had a
bunch as a student. Names and what they taught and
so forth. Now, from a personal standpoint?
Either. Well, from a personal standpoint,
Harrison Hurth. In fact, my family, Alice had
Harrison Hurth for a course. Leslie had him for two
courses, and I had him for a course. You know that we
know the Hurths quite well, but let's make believe
that I didn't. What was, what? Low key. low key, but
what did he do well? But I was older, you have to
realize. I took his course, it was technical
writing in the summer. And there were a lot of
veterans in there, and there were a lot of the
younger kids too. And Harrison had, this guy kept
turning up with A's. And I think it happened about
one time, and of course he is so perceptive, I guess
he must have felt, there ain't no way. And so he had
us start riding in class.
Of course, personally, he was a neighbor on top of
that. Now, I understand his nickname was Happy
Harry. I never heard that. Oh, really? No.
Somebody told me that was his. And what I know about
him, that fits, because he always seems upbeat.
And then I had old Carl Elmquist.
What did he teach? He taught. advanced English,
Shakespeare, and English Lit. We knew how the
six-day bicycle races were in Chicago. He hardly
ever taught us much. He was a nice guy. What about
some of the others? Well, of course, down in PE, I
had Seacrest and Colonel Anderson. Now, you talk
about a demanding teacher. give examples. He was
talking to us one time in his track course about
preparation and of course he he just believed that
the way to prepare just do it over and over and over
and over and he got to the pole vault when he was
going through each of the field events and he said
the best way to train for the pole vault you
remember those dang things I'd like to have seen
some of the kids from that period using the
equipment today. They said, you just have that
youngster take that pole and run around that 440
track, not full speed, but just carrying that pole
so he can get accustomed to it. And old Landis
taught a basketball course. And Dr. Landis had
just come, it was his first semester to teach here,
And he was a great believer in intramural
athletics. Here, these are all athletes and PE
majors. We're doing basketball. He said, when in
doubt, hook pass, if you ever put that spin. Of
course, he'd get up there and demonstrate it. We
were down in the bowels of the Ware Field House, if
you remember that weird place over there by the
intramural office.
And I had Dr. Summey, I thought was a classic
installer. We had a bunch of athletes in there, and
boy, they did extremely well. In fact, it was Dean
Bolton, it was Brooks. Dean Brooks called a bunch
of guys in, athletes that he'd known before
service, and complimented them on their grades.
He said, I just didn't believe you guys could do
that well. Right. Keep going on faculty. Well,
let's see. I was always particularly fond of, in
counseling students, to know courses where
students had difficulty. You know, Kreiss, do you
remember? Dr. Kreiss. He just recently retired, I
guess. taught that biology 115. I felt like as I got
to public schools, if you place a teacher where
they're comfortable, they'll do a better job. And
I felt like a lot of times that some of those profs
wound up teaching courses that they really were
disinterested in.
I don't say they took it out on students, but their
performance was not good. Let's see,
math. Well, I was a real scholar when it came to
algebra. When I entered A&M at 41, you had a choice
of the 102 or 101. So I took 102, and I'd had a high
school coach taught the advanced algebra in high
school. And we didn't work on stated problems, if
you can imagine. And the first major test, I went in
there and we had five questions, four of them
stated problems. And so I was advised that I needed
to move back down to 101, which I don't regret.
Class sizes in that era. Well, I'm going to guess, I
would say 30 or under, most of them, English,
mathematics. Science was the larger one. They had
just, I guess they'd always had the large lecture
room, but I would guess maybe 100. My largest
class, as I recall, was geology and chemistry. As
you look back on those days when you were a young
faculty member, what was the faculty doing here,
the academic program, that in hindsight was very
positive, strong, good? You said teaching. How
was that encouraged, that good teaching? Well,
it's hard to say because I As I got to know the profs,
and Alice and I lived right in the middle of them as
regular students and played softball league, and
I had worked at a swimming pool, so I knew all the
children. It was the fact that they were just, that
was their thing, you know. They came here from
Mississippi State, Mississippi, and I guess
Alabama, and then probably some through the
Midwest. And they just were dedicated people. And
they didn't pay them anything, I don't think. Who
lived on the, which faculty lived on the campus?
Well, when I was here as a student, Mary Eccles
could tell you because she was talking about that.
Was it just the senior faculty, the old-timers?
That I couldn't tell you. I know later on when, you
know, in the early 50s, I guess they started
clearing out that back for the MSC. I don't know
whether that was it or not. They had that row of
faculty houses there. It came this way and then
went down toward where the vice president, I guess
now, or dean, a man, whoever, that little house.
Yeah. All right. The counseling program. It was
done when I was a student. Well, but when you were a
young faculty member. Well, that's where I
started. If I'm a student and I want advice, where
did I go? Oh, to your faculty. To your teacher. Oh,
yeah. course I was fortunate because teaching
down there as a graduate student in physical ed and
then later on in the counseling center I made
rounds just like I did in athletics talking to
teachers just get my impression of them and you
know in those days you could kind of help a kid go
over to a course where He might not have what I'd
call the basic skills, but he was a good listener.
And you teach him a few gimmicks on taking notes and
things like that. Who were supposedly, there must
have been some teachers that were supposedly
easier to get a grade from. Well, I couldn't say.
Weren't there any myths about, didn't I hear about
Dr. Dan the grade point man? Oh, yeah. but don't let
that fool you.
Dan Russell and Dan Davis both had that
reputation.
And then the hardest teacher I ever had, and of
course I was I was really misplaced because I took a
geography course under old Doc Schlesser. Was he
here with me? And he got on this latitude and
longitude, and here are all these Air Force guys,
you know, and here are two or three of us infantry
guys. We had a compass. That was about it. But I tell
you what, he could get you to do better. And of
course he lived across the street too. Alright,
you're in the basic division, is that right? Yeah.
And about how many people were in the... College,
basic college? Yeah. All the freshmen. And
sophomores and a few juniors up to a 30-30. 30 hours
pass, 30 hours grade. They didn't get out of there
with less than a C. So all freshmen started out in
the basic division. They could indicate their
major. They were still, we had, when we first
started, I think we had four counselors. And then
it kind of got bigger and bigger, and Les Palmer and
Jack Dobson would come over part-time and help.
You mentioned counselors, so If I'm a student and I
needed some academic advice, I could go to one of
those. You came in the front just like you would in a
doctor's office. They took them. If you had a
preference, you might have to wait. I was backed by
the back door, and those kids would come into my
office through the back door. Who were those four?
Do you remember? Those four counselors? Yeah,
Kingston and... Al Kingston went to Georgia
State.
Bob Jacobs.
I think Cliff was there. Cliff Ransel. Yeah. I
can't be sure. He might come later. Then we picked
up a guy named Perry. He was a reading specialist
and he was kind of a funny little man. He taught you
to read by legal size. Hand that out. And, of
course, then he brought in another young man who
was really superb and reserved. So we did a lot. In
fact, I made a presentation one time, and Kingston
told me, he said, if you're going to do this, you
better have a 1,500 sample. And, of course, we were
fortunate because we had all the reading people
there. Now, administratively, who was in charge
of the basic division? John Bertram. John
Bertram. Retired naval. Well, he may have been a
reserve naval officer. Of course, he was a shy,
retiring guy.
I know the guy was first class, but he kind of gave me
the impression he was running that like he might
when he was aboard ships. You can try that on
Austin, because he knew him better than I did. He
left, and then we got Bob Com. Com? Yeah, he went to
Oklahoma State. K-A-H-M? No, K-A-M-M. M-M,
that's right. He was a class guy, and he knew
guidance. John was, you know, he was an old ag guy,
but not that that's... Right. Describe in the
early 50s who was president.
Was Mr. Gilchrist still? I'm not sure when
Gilchrist left. Tom Harrington. Must have been
president because he hired me for the graduate
deal and hired me full time for Ed Syke. Tell me
about, make believe I didn't know anything about
Tom Harrington and his personality and his
talents. Tell me about it. Tremendous person.
Chemistry teacher. I was never fortunate enough
because I was a liberal arts student. But I never
heard anybody criticize him. Ever. You know, we
used to kid Later on, you know, you got to know him
better. They were always joking about some of the
athletes' personnel folders, their grades and
everything kind of disappeared in the back of his
desk. You know, you kind of have to be careful
because of Biz Harrington still. But he was really
a class man. He'd call you every once in a while and
ask you how you're getting along. I appreciate
that. What kind of personality? Outgoing,
really.
I laughed. John Hall talked to the Lions Club. I
wish I invited you to go. But he was talking about
Pinky Downs. And he is one of my most fond memories.
You could walk across the campus and he always
stopped. Asked me how you doing. A little
chit-chat. Maybe about athletics or something.
And he'd say, turned to go and he said, Bud, keep up
the good work. And I just, that just made your day.
You know, official greeter. Was Dr. Harrington,
did you think of him in the early 50s as the key
academic decision maker? Well, see there again,
why I said that on the phone, I was more or less
removed from it because In the early jobs, in my
early job as the director of that guidance
service, I was responsible for the department
head of education and psychology. There were
three people in there, and I was the fourth. You're
saying education and psychology was three
people? Yeah. The department. And then the next
step up would be Dr. Harrington, who was liberal
arts then. And by this point, the World War II
veterans are pretty well gone, early 50s. The
enrollment comes back down to a more reasonable
number. It was a nice, I think you could walk across
the campus and you knew most of the, I did, most of
the problems. My dad had a terrible memory. We'd be
walking down the street in Dallas and he'd see
somebody and he'd recognize them. And he'd say,
Mr. what's your name? I'd like for you to meet my
son. And of course, going through this core stuff,
you kind of get a little more orientation. OK. Were
there any changes in the way the basic division
operated during these years? No there was a lot of
competition from the deans because they weren't
they didn't have the Austin can give you the
nitty-gritty but that they didn't have majors
that they could count on and Potts was the toughest
and of course he and Heaton must have been blood
brothers. All right tell me about R.C. Potts. I
liked him personally, but I didn't ever agree with
him. What was his task? Well, he was dean of
agriculture. Associate dean. Associate dean.
Yeah, that's right. I'm sorry. And so he was the
chief agriculture student advisor? Yeah. But
this was when they got to the School of Agriculture
with 30 hours and 30 grade points. Well, they could
have 30 hours and 40 really. It didn't matter, but
they had to have that base. And I guess when Mr.
Rudder came, he kind of, Kutash used to always tell
Rand to get over there and tell him what we're
doing. And this never happened. Of course, I guess
eventually, I guess prior to that, Mr. Rudder had
asked about that study for military. Right now, so
that POTS and agriculture, who were the...
Business was Dan Lowe, the associate. Did the
contact with us too. We never had any difficulty
except... Engineering. Was. Cliff Ransom. Cliff
Ransom. Until he came to us. I don't remember when
he... Was Kutash for all of arts and science or just
business? Dan Lowe. Dan Lowe? Was he all of...
Business. all all but just business right who did
the rest of arts and sciences
Schlesselman yeah and then later Charles okay
what were what were the tough courses that okay and
history and history you know that you might turn
that off I made a study one you're you're talking
about the kinds of students and advising them and
how to get them going in the right direction.
Describe that, please. Well, we were fortunate in
those days to have a lot of psychological testing
to guide us, plus the high school record. And you
can tell a lot from that. I found out later on with
athletes that if you see a consistency up or a
consistency straight across, or a dipping down of
grades and performance in individual subjects.
And you can utilize that to help students select
courses that they're going to feel comfortable.
It may be a biology course. It may be a history
course. And when you're talking to a student, you
have to be aware of this type of thing. We didn't
talk much about religion, but some youngsters
brought it up themselves and where you see a
discipline through their churches or religious
background, their family, and their school.
You've got three criteria that I thought. And we
found this working in the early years with
opportunity award candidates because we had to
interview each one individually before. before
we made a recommendation. About how many of those
per year were awarded? I'm going to guess 40 or 50
maybe, for the whole school. Yeah, you'd
interview about how many? Oh, I'd interview 50
myself at least. Three
or four times as many as could be awarded? Oh, yeah.
And by and large... And it was financial. That was
the base criteria.
And it's hard to say, how do you determine, you
know, you've got three children and you've got one
parent working, you know, and it's not in a job that
you really make a whole lot of money. Can you recall
any of those Opportunity Award winners that you
now are proud to single out? Oh yeah, one is, I guess
he's retired by now, it's Carlton Hazelwood. In
fact, later on, as he came through pre-med, three
of us wrote letters of recommendation all over the
United States, and he couldn't get in medical
school. So he went on and got an advanced degree. I
can't remember. It was a real specialty. He wound
up teaching down at Texas Medical. So, you know,
you can't use it. I guess his highest test was a 4% or
5%. but he had straight A's. Any others you
remember Opportunity Award winners? Well, no.
He's the only one, you know, they don't compute.
Because I have the impression that Opportunity
Award winners have become among the most loyal,
generous, grateful Aggies. Which...